Split CRG functionality for U and S-modes (#491)
riscv/riscv-cheri: src/cheri-pte-ext.adoc

[#section_sv_cheri]
[#cheri_pte_ext]
== Extending Page-Based Virtual-Memory Systems for CHERI (RV64 only), including "{cheri_pte_ext_name}"

NOTE: _Sv32_ (for RV32) does not have any spare PTE bits, and so no features from this chapter can be implemented.

In CHERI harts the Page Table Entry (PTE) format is extended to control the flow of capabilities in memory (see <<limit_cap_prop>>).
This is achieved by adding the PTE.CW bit described below and is a mandatory feature when any virtual memory translation scheme (_Sv39_, _Sv48_ or _Sv57_) is implemented on an RV64 system.
By default PTE.CW=0 which will prevent legacy OSs from being able to load or store tagged capabilities without software modification.

Additionally the {cheri_pte_ext_name} extension adds the ability to perform capability revocation of user mode pages (see <<cap_revocation>>) by adding the PTE.CRG bit, and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG as described below.

NOTE: {cheri_pte_ext_name} is strongly recommended but not mandatory as a future version of this specification may specify an improved method.

> NOTE: There is no explicit mechanism for enabling or disabling {cheri_pte_ext_name}. Its presence can be tested for by probing the existence of <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG.

Reviewer: That's fine, though maybe worth saying that leaving the bits as zero has the same behaviour as the extension not being implemented? Otherwise it may not be immediately obvious that you can choose to ignore it.

> NOTE: There is no explicit mechanism for enabling or disabling {cheri_pte_ext_name}. Its presence can be tested for by probing the existence of <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG.

Author: done

NOTE: A future version of this specification may include kernel revocation which may require an <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SCRG bit.

The remainder of this chapter jointly specifies the behavior of PTE.CW, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG.

NOTE: The description below assumes that {cheri_pte_ext_name} has been implemented.
 If that is _not_ the case then PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG should be taken as read-only-zero for purpose of the description in the remainder of this chapter only.
 PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG remain reserved in this case.

> The minimum level of PTE support is to set CW to 1 in all PTEs intended for storing capabilities (i.e. anonymous mappings) and leave <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG and CRG in all PTEs set to 0, which will allow capabilities with their tags set to be loaded and stored successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimum level of PTE support is to set CW to 1 in all PTEs intended for storing capabilities (i.e. private anonymous mappings) and leave <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG and CRG in all PTEs set to 0, which will allow capabilities with their tags set to be loaded and stored successfully.
```

NOTE: A future version of this specification may include kernel revocation which may require an <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SCRG bit.

The remainder of this chapter jointly specifies the behavior of PTE.CW, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG.

NOTE: The description below assumes that {cheri_pte_ext_name} has been implemented.

>  If that is _not_ the case then PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG should be taken as read-only-zero for purpose of the description in the remainder of this chapter only.

Reviewer: I think this is ok now in that what it says is what we want to be true, but it would be better to split the description up into first CW on its own and then in some Svucrg[^1] what CRG adds on top, which is then text you can just not read if you don't implement that. But if you want to defer that to at least get the spec correct first that's ok.

[^1]: A more RISC-V-y name for what is currently called Zcheripte, which is definitely not a correct name for the thing given it (a) is a privileged spec extension (so should be Sfoo) (b) pertains to virtual memory (so should be Svfoo)

Author: I agree that it would be better to split the descriptions but I can't do that in the near term, so I think this will have to do for now.

Author: resolving for now - I appreciate that the structure should be improved

regards to the ongoing capability revocation cycle. Two schemes are permitted:

* A load page fault exception is raised when a capability load or AMO instruction is executed
with <<c_perm>> granted and the virtual page's CRG bit does not equal <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGS/CRGU.
* A load page fault exception is raised when a capability load or AMO instruction is executed
with <<c_perm>> granted and the virtual page's CRG bit does not equal <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGS/CRGU.
and the capability read from memory optionally has its tag set^1^.

[[pte_cw_crg_load_summary]]
.Summary of Load CW and CRG behavior in the PTEs
[%autowidth,float="center",align="center",cols="<,<,<,<",options="header"]
|===

> |PTE.CW |Mode |PTE.CRG                                 |Load/AMO

Reviewer: This needs to be clear it's not just about the mode doing the access, it also interacts with sstatus.SUM; if the kernel does a load of a PTE with U set then it behaves as if done by U-mode here, not S-mode. Otherwise system calls can be used to bypass revocation.

Author: fixed

regards to the ongoing capability revocation cycle. Two schemes are permitted:

* A load page fault exception is raised when a capability load or AMO instruction is executed
with <<c_perm>> granted and the virtual page's CRG bit does not equal <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG in user mode.
* A load page fault exception is raised when a capability load or AMO instruction is executed
with <<c_perm>> granted and the virtual page's CRG bit does not equal <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG in user mode.
and the capability read from memory optionally has its tag set^1^.

[[pte_cw_crg_load_summary]]
.Summary of Load CW and CRG behavior in the PTEs
[%autowidth,float="center",align="center",cols="<,<,<,<",options="header"]
|===
|PTE.CW |Mode^1^ |PTE.CRG                              |Load/AMO
| 0     | S/U | X                                      | Clear loaded tag

> | 1     | U   |&#8800; <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG | Page fault, or page fault if tag is set^1^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 1     | U   |&#8800; <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG | Page fault, or page fault if tag is set
```

Reviewer 2: I think we need to merge these footnotes so that the ^1^ here refers to the ^1^ further down.

| 1     | U   |=       <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG | Normal operation
| 1     | S   | X                                      | Normal operation^2^
|===

> ^1^ This is the current privilege mode, not the effective mode of the access and so is not affected by <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SUM.

Reviewer 3: I don't think `sstatus.SUM` has anything to do with effective privilege mode, which regards `mstatus.prv` and `mstatus.mpp`.  So I think this needs to be rephrased.

Reviewer: If mstatus.MPRV=1 then all data memory accesses are performed as if in mode mstatus.MPP. So if mstatus.MPP=01 (S) then sstatus.SUM applies to all M-mode's data memory accesses.

Reviewer: And it *must* be affected by SUM. It is vital that, when the kernel copies memory to/from userspace, it follows exactly the same restrictions as userspace. Otherwise you could use a system call as a gadget to copy a to-be-revoked capability from a not-yet-swept page to a swept one.

Reviewer: That is, whether UCRG is used or not *must* be a function solely of the U bit, not the current mode as well.

Reviewer 3: So your current privilege mode is M and your effective privilege mode is U.  Because the current privilege mode is M, you will continue as "normal operation".  Is this correct?

`sstatus.SUM` doesn't strictly change the effective privilege mode, otherwise, you couldn't access supervisor pages!

Maybe something to the effect...

> This is the current privilege mode, not the effective mode of the access. S-mode access to U-mode pages using <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SUM are classified as S-mode access

Reviewer 4: Yes, you are right about the SUM bit for sure, so the " **not affected by <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SUM**" is wrong. I think this is the first time we have page bits that _only_ apply in user mode I think?

Reviewer: For RISC-V I believe so, yes

Author: ok - so it should be `the effective mode of the memory access` instead - should be a simple text replacement.

Reviewer: The effective mode is still S-mode with SUM. SUM just determines whether or not S-mode accessing pages with the U bit faults. That's why I said:

> That is, whether UCRG is used or not must be a function solely of the U bit, not the current mode as well. 

No mention of "effective mode". If the U bit is set, CRG exists and UCRG is checked against. If the U bit is clear, there is no CRG bit. There does not need to be any mention of the mode, because that is both necessary and sufficient.

Author: ok - done - just PTE.U

> ^1^ This is the current privilege mode, not the effective mode of the access and so is not affected by <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SUM.

Author: ```suggestion
^1^ This is the effective privilege mode of the memory access.
```

<<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>.UCRG also exists. Reading or writing it is equivalent to reading or writing <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG.

> NOTE: There is no current software use for <<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>.UCRG.

Reviewer: I mean, there is. It's the same bit as sstatus.UCRG, which is used, so by definition so is mstatus.UCRG. I do not think there's anything interesting to say here; everything S-mode has shows up in mstatus, so exists, and there's no additional M-mode state because it's about virtual memory, which M-mode doesn't deal with unless requesting to access memory as if in S/U-mode via mstatus.MPRV. Which becomes even clearer if the extension in question is named Svfoo.

Reviewer: This would be like saying there is no use for mstatus.SUM, which is in some sense true, M-mode isn't directly messing with that bit for its own use. But S-mode is, and it's the exact same bit, existing even in mstatus. And this is important if you want to have M-mode do world switching between multiple S-mode worlds, because although M-mode doesn't care what the bit is, it still needs to be context switching it.

Author: yeah true - I'll simplify the text

Author: removed.

<<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>.UCRG also exists. Reading or writing it is equivalent to reading or writing <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG.

> NOTE: <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>> is required to be a subset of <<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>, therefore UCRG is included in both.

Author: yeah ok - deleted

  {bits:  1, name: 'WPRI'},
  {bits:  1, name: 'MPELP'},
  {bits:  1, name: 'MDT'},
  {bits: 18, name: 'WPRI'},

>   {bits:  1, name: 'CRGU'},

Reviewer: UCRG and SCRG is the normal naming scheme

Author: fixed
